v1.23 blog post: Pod Security Admission Graduates to Beta (#30502)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2021-12-15-pod-security-admission-psa-beta.md

---
layout: blog
title: 'Pod Security Admission (PSA) Graduates to Beta'
date: 2021-12-15

> slug: pod-security-admission-psa-beta

Reviewer: Avoiding a kind of tautology:
```suggestion
slug: pod-security-admission-beta
```

---

**Authors:** Jim Angel (Google), Lachlan Evenson (Microsoft)

> _Editor's note: [Jim Angel](https://twitter.com/JimmAngel) and [Lachlan Evenson](https://twitter.com/LachlanEvenson) are both [CNCF Cloud Ambassadors](https://www.cncf.io/people/ambassadors/) and wear many hats in the open source Kubernetes community. Jim is a Cloud Consultant at Google and Lachlan is a Principal Program Manager on the Azure Core Upstream._

Reviewer 2: >  Lachlan is a Principal Program Manager on the Azure Core Upstream.

either "Lachlan is a Principal Program Manager on the Azure Core Upstream team." or "Lachlan is a Principal Program Manager on Azure Core Upstream." would be better.

Reviewer: I'd shift this paragraph to the foot of the article. We don't have a strong convention on this but I want readers to jump straight to the meat of the article.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
_Editor's note: [Jim Angel](https://twitter.com/JimmAngel) and [Lachlan Evenson](https://twitter.com/LachlanEvenson) are both [CNCF Cloud Ambassadors](https://www.cncf.io/people/ambassadors/) and wear many hats in the open source Kubernetes community. Jim is a Cloud Consultant at Google and Lachlan is a Principal Program Manager on the Azure Core Upstream team._
```

Author: Accidentally closed this one out.

The editors note blurb was used to establish credibility before continuing to read (as seen in similar blogs). I'd rather remove it entirely over moving it to the bottom.

Thoughts?

Reviewer: It's the Kubernetes blog and we're discussing a feature graduation. _To me_ that provides all the gravitas we need. Omitting any note like this is a form of [countersignalling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Countersignaling).

## Introduction

> With the release of Kubernetes v1.23, [Pod Security Admission (PSA)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-admission/) has now entered beta. PSA is a [built-in](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/admission-controllers/) admission controller that evaluates pod specifications against a predefined set of [Pod Security Standards](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-standards/) and determines whether to `admit` or `deny` the pod from running. PSA is the successor to [Pod Security Policy](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/pod-security-policy/) which was deprecated in v1.21 and is removed in v1.25. Let's explore how Pod Security Admission works in the hope that cluster administrators and developers alike will use this to enforce secure defaults for their workloads. In this blog we will cover the key concepts of Pod Security Admission along with how to use it. 

Reviewer 4: nit: I prefer to add line breaks after ~100 characters or so for ease of review. It makes it easier to comment on something in the middle of a paragraph, and prevents multiple comment threads from being collapsed into one.

> With the release of Kubernetes v1.23, [Pod Security Admission (PSA)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-admission/) has now entered beta. PSA is a [built-in](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/admission-controllers/) admission controller that evaluates pod specifications against a predefined set of [Pod Security Standards](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-standards/) and determines whether to `admit` or `deny` the pod from running. PSA is the successor to [Pod Security Policy](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/pod-security-policy/) which was deprecated in v1.21 and is removed in v1.25. Let's explore how Pod Security Admission works in the hope that cluster administrators and developers alike will use this to enforce secure defaults for their workloads. In this blog we will cover the key concepts of Pod Security Admission along with how to use it. 

Reviewer: In docs, I'd call the new feature Pod Security Admission or Pod Security admission. There's no resource in the API that you can fetch with a kind called PodSecurity, and UpperCamelCase names give readers a hint that they would see that.

Separately, line breaks make articles easier to localize (some localizations pick up blog articles).

## Why Pod Security Admission

> Pod Security Admission overcomes the shortcomings of, deprecated, Pod Security Policy (PSP):

Reviewer: I'd write:
```suggestion
Pod Security Admission overcomes key shortcomings of Kubernetes' existing, but deprecated,
PodSecurityPolicy (PSP) mechanism:
```
Is that better?

Reviewer 3: Yep. I like it

   * Policy authorization model — challenging to deploy with controllers.

>    * Challenging to enable — no dry-run/audit capabilities made it hard to enable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * Risks around switching — a lack of dry-run/audit capabilities made it hard to enable PodSecurityPolicy 
     safely in your cluster.
```
?

   * Inconsistent and Unbounded API — security constraints were ever-changing which led to the API needing changes.

The shortcomings of PSP made it very difficult to use which led the community to reevaluate whether or not a better implementation could achieve the same goals. One of those goals was to provide an out-of-the-box solution to apply security best practices. Pod Security Admission ships with predefined Pod Security levels that a cluster administrator can configure to meet the desired security posture.

> It's important to note that Pod Security Admission doesn't have complete feature parity with the deprecated Pod Security Policy. Specifically, it doesn't have the ability to `mutate` or change Kubernetes resources to auto-remediate a policy violation on behalf of the user. Additionally, it doesn't provide fine-grain control over each allowed field and value within a pod specification or any other Kubernetes resource that you may wish to evaluate. If you need more fine-grained policy control then take a look at the [Gatekeeper](https://github.com/open-policy-agent/gatekeeper) project which supports such use cases.

Reviewer: Should we also mention there are other projects with more fine grained control? https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-standards/#faq has our official list of alternatives.

> Pod Security Admission also adheres to Kubernetes best practices of declarative object management by denying resources that violate the policy. This requires resources to be updated in source repositories, and tooling to be updated prior to being deployed to Kubernetes.

Author: If you're referring to "Pod Security Admission also adheres to Kubernetes best practices of declarative object management by denying resources that violate the policy. This requires resources to be updated in source repositories, and tooling to be updated prior to being deployed to Kubernetes."

The intention is to call out the explicit declarative nature of Pod Security (and any admission controller), whereas PSP had the ability to introspect CRI information to make decisions. For example, if you built a container as non-root and didn't include a `runAsUser` would pass PSP but fail Pod Security (circumstances depending).

Open to alternative ways to draw attention to this paradigm shift from PSP to "normal" admission behavior.

Each of these policy levels define which fields are restricted within a pod specification and the allowed values. Some of the fields restricted by these policies include:
   * `spec.containers[*].ports`
   * `spec.volumes[*].hostPath`
   * `spec.securityContext`
   * `spec.containers[*].securityContext`
    
These policy levels can be applied in two different ways. Either via namespace labels or an AdmissionConfiguration resource. Using namespace labels allows for granular per namespace policy selection whereas using AdmissionConfiguration allows cluster-level defaulting along with exemptions.

### Policy modes

Policies are applied using modes. Here is a list of modes:
   * `enforce` — Any Pods that violate the policy will be rejected
   * `audit` — Pods with violations will be allowed and an audit annotation will be added
   * `warn` — Pods that violate the policy will be allowed and a warning message will be sent back to the user.

In addition to modes you can also pin the policy to a specific version for example v1.22. Pinning to a specific version allows the behavior to remain consistent as policy changes happen over Kubernetes releases.

> ## Hands on demo

Reviewer: Can instead
- link to https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/enforce-standards-admission-controller/ instead?
- copy the steps from there?

_or_ merge these steps into that task page?

I don't want us to have two pages that document different ways to try the same thing, on release day. That'd feel counter-productive as readers might wonder which they should follow.

Reviewer: You could also add this content within https://docs.k8s.io/tutorials/ - I think that'd be a really good choice.

Author: @sftim do you think the additional content should be included with the blog PR or a follow-up? Happy to open a tracking issue. Also, are you saying to link the entire hands-on demo portion to the official docs and move the demo there?

I like both ideas, if I understand them correctly, but it might be worth tracking vs. implementing.

### Prerequisites

- [kind CLI installed](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/quick-start/#installation)
- [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/) or [Podman](https://podman.io/getting-started/installation) container runtime & CLI

### Deploy a kind cluster

```shell
kind create cluster --image kindest/node:v1.23.0
```

It might take awhile to start and once it's started it might take a minute or so before the node becomes ready.

```shell
kubectl cluster-info --context kind-kind
```

Wait for the node STATUS to become ready.

```shell
kubectl get nodes
```

The output is similar to this:

```shell
NAME                 STATUS   ROLES                  AGE   VERSION
kind-control-plane   Ready    control-plane,master   54m   v1.23.0
```

### Confirm PSA is enabled

> The best way to [confirm the API's default enabled plugins](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/admission-controllers/#which-plugins-are-enabled-by-default) is to check the Kubernetes API container's help arguments.

Reviewer: IMO we should document this _somewhere_. Folks will want to know!

```shell
kubectl -n kube-system exec kube-apiserver-kind-control-plane -it -- kube-apiserver -h | grep "default enabled ones"
```

The output is similar to this:

> ```shell

Reviewer: This isn't a shell script.

...
      --enable-admission-plugins strings
admission plugins that should be enabled in addition
to default enabled ones (NamespaceLifecycle, LimitRanger,
ServiceAccount, TaintNodesByCondition, PodSecurity, Priority,
DefaultTolerationSeconds, DefaultStorageClass,
StorageObjectInUseProtection, PersistentVolumeClaimResize,
RuntimeClass, CertificateApproval, CertificateSigning,
CertificateSubjectRestriction, DefaultIngressClass,
MutatingAdmissionWebhook, ValidatingAdmissionWebhook,
ResourceQuota).
...
```

`PodSecurity` is listed in the group of default enabled admission plugins.

### Configure Pod Security Admission

Policies are applied to a namespace via labels. These labels are as follows:

>    * `pod-security.kubernetes.io/<MODE>: <LEVEL>` (required)

Reviewer 4: nit: I don't want people to think the are required to set this on every namespace as soon as they upgrade to v1.23. Maybe something like this instead?
```suggestion
   * `pod-security.kubernetes.io/<MODE>: <LEVEL>` (required to enable pod security)
```

   * `pod-security.kubernetes.io/<MODE>-version: <VERSION>` (*optional*, defaults to latest)

> A specific version can be supplied for each enforcement mode. The version pins the policy to the version that was defined at that Kubernetes version. This is to increase flexibility for future  Kubernetes enhancements and unknown security issues.

Reviewer 2: When I read "unknown security issues" I think, "Wait a minute -

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A specific version can be supplied for each enforcement mode. The version pins the policy to the version that was shipped as part of the Kubernetes release. Pinning to a specific Kubernetes version allows for deterministic policy behavior while allowing flexibility for future updates to Security Policy Standards.
```

> From earlier, the modes are:
>    * `enforce` — Any Pods that violate the policy will be rejected
>    * `audit` — Pods with violations will be allowed and an audit annotation will be added
>    * `warn` — Pods that violate the policy will be allowed and a warning message will be sent back to the user.

Reviewer 4: Rather than repeating this whole thing, maybe just enumerate the modes? 
```suggestion
From earlier, recall that the possible modes are `enforce`, `audit` and `warn`.
```

> > Note: The default for enforce/warn/audit is `privileged` if not specified

Reviewer 4: I know there's a special directive for notes on the docs pages. I don't know whether it applies to blog posts...

Reviewer: I wouldn't use those callouts on blog articles, but I also _wouldn't_ use a quote (block quote, here) to simulate them.
Just use running text, and bold / italics if you feel the need for it.

Author: Removed entire "Note" as it doesn't add any value to the reader's experience.

When to `warn`?

> Don't use`warn` for the exact same level+version of the policy as `enforce`. In the admission sequence, if `enforce` fails, the entire sequence fails before evaluating the `warn`.

Reviewer 2: > use`warn`

needs a space.

Reviewer 4: There actually is a use case for this - `enforce` isn't applied to workload resources (e.g. `deployment`), so an identical `warn` label can be used to give early warning on those. I'd actually recommend this pattern in most cases, unless you're using mutating admission (which is why it's not the default... but maybe it should be?).

* `warn` at a stricter level (e.g. `enforce` baseline, `warn` restricted)

Let's create 3 namespaces and apply all 3 PSA security profiles. First, create the namespaces:

```shell
kubectl create namespace kube-test-privileged
kubectl create namespace kube-test-baseline
kubectl create namespace kube-test-restricted
```

Add the respective labels.

```shell
# kube-test-privileged enforces a "privileged" security policy and warns / audits on baseline
kubectl label --overwrite ns kube-test-privileged \
  pod-security.kubernetes.io/enforce=privileged \
  pod-security.kubernetes.io/warn=baseline \
  pod-security.kubernetes.io/audit=baseline

# kube-test-baseline enforces a "baseline" security policy and warns / audits on restricted
kubectl label --overwrite ns kube-test-baseline \
  pod-security.kubernetes.io/enforce=baseline \
  pod-security.kubernetes.io/warn=restricted \
  pod-security.kubernetes.io/audit=restricted

# kube-test-restricted enforces a "restricted" security policy and audits on restricted
kubectl label --overwrite ns kube-test-restricted \
  pod-security.kubernetes.io/enforce=restricted \
  pod-security.kubernetes.io/audit=restricted

> ```

Reviewer 4: Consider creating the namespace before the example that uses them (or even reusing & relabeling a single namespace). That way the reader doesn't need to check back here to remember how each namespace was configured.

First, let's try to deploy it in the restricted namespace:

```shell
cat <<EOF | kubectl -n kube-test-restricted apply -f -
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: nginx-privileged
spec:
  containers:
  - name: nginx
    image: nginx
    securityContext:
      allowPrivilegeEscalation: true
EOF
```

The output is similar to this:

```shell
Error from server (Forbidden): error when creating "STDIN": pods "nginx-privileged" is forbidden: violates PodSecurity "restricted:latest": allowPrivilegeEscalation != false (container "nginx" must set securityContext.allowPrivilegeEscalation=false), unrestricted capabilities (container "nginx" must set securityContext.capabilities.drop=["ALL"]), runAsNonRoot != true (pod or container "nginx" must set securityContext.runAsNonRoot=true), seccompProfile (pod or container "nginx" must set securityContext.seccompProfile.type to "RuntimeDefault" or "Localhost")
```

Now let's try the `kube-test-privileged` namespace

```shell
cat <<EOF | kubectl -n kube-test-privileged apply -f -
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: nginx-privileged
spec:
  containers:
  - name: nginx

>     image: nginx

Reviewer 4: nit: I'd prefer to use the pause image (`k8s.gcr.io/pause`) in examples that don't need to actually run anything.

It's less likely to terminate for other reasons, and it's an image we own (not promoting other projects)

Reviewer: Maybe add a comment about why we picked it?

    securityContext:
      allowPrivilegeEscalation: true
EOF
```

The output is similar to this:

```shell
pod/nginx-privileged created
```

We can run `kubectl -n kube-test-privileged get pods` to verify it is running.

**Baseline level and workload**

> The baseline pod demonstrates sensible defaults but does not allow privilege escalation, so the pod above would fail here too ([more info](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-standards/#baseline)). Baseline accepts null / no values for unset keys.

Reviewer 2: "more info" is not ideal link text because of how SEO and screenreaders work. I suggest moving the link to the word "baseline" at the start of the sentence, and removing the "more info".

kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: nginx-baseline
spec:
  containers:
  - name: nginx
    image: nginx
    securityContext:
      allowPrivilegeEscalation: false
      capabilities:
        add:
          - NET_BIND_SERVICE
          - CHOWN
EOF
```

The output is similar to this:

```shell
Error from server (Forbidden): error when creating "STDIN": pods "nginx-baseline" is forbidden: violates PodSecurity "restricted:latest": unrestricted capabilities (container "nginx" must set securityContext.capabilities.drop=["ALL"]; container "nginx" must not include "CHOWN" in securityContext.capabilities.add), runAsNonRoot != true (pod or container "nginx" must set securityContext.runAsNonRoot=true), seccompProfile (pod or container "nginx" must set securityContext.seccompProfile.type to "RuntimeDefault" or "Localhost")
```

Now let's try the `kube-test-baseline` namespace

```shell
cat <<EOF | kubectl -n kube-test-baseline apply -f -
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: nginx-baseline
spec:
  containers:
  - name: nginx
    image: nginx
    securityContext:
      allowPrivilegeEscalation: false
      capabilities:
        add:
          - NET_BIND_SERVICE
          - CHOWN
EOF
```

> The output is similar to this:

Reviewer 4: it's easy to miss that `pod/nginx-baseline created`. Consider highlighting it here.
```suggestion
The output is similar to the following. Note that the warnings match the error message from the test above, but the pod is still successfully created.
```

```shell
Warning: would violate PodSecurity "restricted:latest": unrestricted capabilities (container "nginx" must set securityContext.capabilities.drop=["ALL"]; container "nginx" must not include "CHOWN" in securityContext.capabilities.add), runAsNonRoot != true (pod or container "nginx" must set securityContext.runAsNonRoot=true), seccompProfile (pod or container "nginx" must set securityContext.seccompProfile.type to "RuntimeDefault" or "Localhost")
pod/nginx-baseline created
```

Remember, we set the `kube-test-baseline` namespace to `warn` based on the restricted profile. We can run `kubectl -n kube-test-baseline get pods` to verify it is running.

**Restricted level and workload**

> Restricted requires rejection of all privileged parameters. It is the most secure with a trade-off for complexity ([more info](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-standards/#restricted)). The restricted policy allows containers to add the `NET_BIND_SERVICE` capability.

Reviewer 2: Same comment as earlier - I suggest that you make the word "Restricted" the link text, not "more info".

In addition to applying labels to namespaces to configure policy you can also configure cluster-wide policies and exemptions using the AdmissionConfiguration resource. 

Using this resource, policy definitions are applied cluster-wide by default and any policy that is applied via namespace labels will take precedence. 

There is no runtime configurable API for this resource and a cluster administrator would need to specify a path to the file below via the `--admission-control-config-file` flag on the API server. 

In the following resource we are enforcing the baseline policy and warning and auditing the baseline policy. We are also making the kube-system namespace exempt from this policy.

It's not recommended to alter control plane / clusters after install, so let's build a new cluster with a default policy on all namespaces.

First, delete the current cluster.

```shell
kind delete cluster
```

Create a Pod Security configuration. 

<!-- TODO: link to the official docs after posted: https://github.com/kubernetes/website/blob/dev-1.23/content/en/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/enforce-standards-admission-controller.md?plain=1#L25-L55
--->

<!-- TODO: is this a BUG?:

> It errors with runtimeClassNames: [] and runs without it, tested on both alphav1/betav1 apis.

Reviewer 4: Looks like you already corrected the fieldname to `runtimeClasses` (I think we had mis-documented it)

We now have a default baseline policy, next pass it to the kind configuration to enable the `--admission-control-config-file` API server argument and pass the policy file.

```shell
cat <<EOF > kind-config.yaml
kind: Cluster
apiVersion: kind.x-k8s.io/v1alpha4
nodes:
- role: control-plane
  kubeadmConfigPatches:
  - |
    kind: ClusterConfiguration
    apiServer:
        # enable admission-control-config flag on the API server
        extraArgs:
          admission-control-config-file: /etc/kubernetes/policies/pod-security.yaml
        # mount new file / directories on the control plane
        extraVolumes:
          - name: policies
            hostPath: /etc/kubernetes/policies
            mountPath: /etc/kubernetes/policies
            readOnly: true
            pathType: "DirectoryOrCreate"
  # mount the local file on the control plane
  extraMounts:
  - hostPath: ./pod-security.yaml
    containerPath: /etc/kubernetes/policies/pod-security.yaml
    readOnly: true
EOF
```

```shell
kind create cluster --image kindest/node:v1.23.0 --config kind-config.yaml
```

Let's look at the default namespace.

```shell
kubectl describe namespace default
```

The output is similar to this:

> ```shell

Reviewer: This isn't a shell script.

Name:         default
Labels:       kubernetes.io/metadata.name=default
Annotations:  <none>
Status:       Active

No resource quota.

No LimitRange resource.
```

Let's create a new namespace and see if the labels apply there.

```shell
kubectl create namespace test-defaults
kubectl describe namespace test-defaults
```

Same.

> ```shell

Reviewer: This isn't a shell script.

Name:         test-defaults
Labels:       kubernetes.io/metadata.name=test-defaults
Annotations:  <none>
Status:       Active

No resource quota.

No LimitRange resource.
```

> Can we deploy a workload that is privileged?

Reviewer: Avoid writing “we” if the sense you're using it in includes the reader; that form can be confusing (and we avoid it even more in the docs).

```shell
cat <<EOF | kubectl -n test-defaults apply -f -
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: nginx-privileged
spec:
  containers:
  - name: nginx
    image: nginx
    securityContext:
      allowPrivilegeEscalation: true
EOF
```

> Hmm... yep. Our default `warn` level is working at least.

Reviewer: Avoid writing “our” if the sense you're using it in includes the reader; that form can be confusing (and we avoid it even more in the docs).

> ```shell

Reviewer: This isn't a shell script.

Warning: would violate PodSecurity "restricted:latest": allowPrivilegeEscalation != false (container "nginx" must set securityContext.allowPrivilegeEscalation=false), unrestricted capabilities (container "nginx" must set securityContext.capabilities.drop=["ALL"]), runAsNonRoot != true (pod or container "nginx" must set securityContext.runAsNonRoot=true), seccompProfile (pod or container "nginx" must set securityContext.seccompProfile.type to "RuntimeDefault" or "Localhost")
pod/nginx-privileged created
```

Let's delete the pod with `kubectl -n test-defaults delete pod/nginx-privileged`.

Is my config even working?

```shell
# shell into the control plane

> docker exec -it kind-control-plane bash

Reviewer: BTW this assumes you're using kind with Docker (and not Podman).

# cat out the file we mounted
cat /etc/kubernetes/policies/pod-security.yaml

# check the api server logs
cat /var/log/containers/kube-apiserver*.log 

# check the api server config
cat /etc/kubernetes/manifests/kube-apiserver.yaml 
```

**UPDATE:** The baseline policy permits `allowPrivilegeEscalation`. While I cannot see the Pod Security default levels of enforcement, they are there. Let's try to provide a manifest that violates the baseline by requesting hostNetwork access.

```shell
cat <<EOF | kubectl -n test-defaults apply -f -
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: nginx-privileged
spec:
  containers:
  - name: nginx
    image: nginx
  hostNetwork: true
EOF

> ```

Reviewer: aside: In docs, but not blog articles, we usually use the `codenew` shortcode and tell people to apply a manifest by its URL.

The output is similar to this:

```shell
Error from server (Forbidden): error when creating "STDIN": pods "nginx-privileged" is forbidden: violates PodSecurity "baseline:latest": host namespaces (hostNetwork=true)
```

> #### Yes!!! It worked! 🎉🎉🎉

Reviewer: nit (simpler fragment identifier):
```suggestion
#### Yes!!! It worked! 🎉🎉🎉 {#it-worked}
```

I later found out, another way to check if things are operating as intended is to check the raw API server metrics endpoint.

Run the following command:

```
kubectl get --raw /metrics | grep pod_security_evaluations_total

> ```

Reviewer 4: Oh, right, nice. This is a better way to check if it's working/enabled (section above).

Author: Do you think it's worth stripping the user journey section of demo and consolidating it by starting with the `raw metrics` check to validate followed by a clean(er) working demo?

I like both approaches. I do enjoy watching "the journey" but other folks might want just raw / working content.

Reviewer 5: Since this is a blog post, I like the user journey section (imo)
